The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ashcliffe Hall, by Emily Sarah Holt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Ashcliffe Hall
       A tale of the last century

Author: Emily Sarah Holt

Release Date: October 3, 2022 [eBook #69096]

Language: English

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASHCLIFFE HALL ***






[Frontispiece: Edward's Escape]



  ASHCLIFFE HALL


  A TALE OF THE LAST CENTURY.



  BY

  EMILY SARAH HOLT



  "No joy is true, save that which hath no end;
  No life is true save that which liveth ever;
  No health is sound, save that which God doth send;
  No love is real, save that which fadeth never."
                            --REV. HORATIUS BOMAR, D.D.



  SAINT PAUL
  D. D. MERRILL COMPANY




CONTENTS.


CHAP.

I. Old Cicely has her Thoughts

II. A Rat behind the Wainscot

III. Alone in the World

IV. My Lady Ingram

V. The Harrying of Lauchie

VI. The Troubles of Greatness

VII. The Night Roswith Died

VIII. Wanted, Diogenes' Lantern

IX. Inside and Outside

X. Anent John Paterson

XI. How Philip Came Back

XII. Traitors--Human and Canine

XIII. Lady Griselda's Ruby Ring




ASHCLIFFE HALL.



I.

OLD CICELY HAS HER THOUGHTS.

  "I ask Thee for the daily strength
    To none that ask denied,
  A mind to blend with outward things
    While keeping at Thy side;
  Content to fill a little space
    So Thou be glorified."
                                Miss Waring.


In a large bedroom, on an autumn afternoon, two girls were divesting
themselves of their out-door attire after a walk.  They were dressed
alike, though their ages were eleven and nineteen.  Their costume
consisted of brown stuff petticoats, over which they wore cashmere
gowns of a white ground, covered with brown-stemmed red flowers, and
edged with quillings of green ribbon.  These dresses were high in the
back and on the shoulders, but were cut down square in the front.
The sleeves reached to the elbows, and were there finished by white
muslin frills.  The girls wore high-heeled shoes, the heels being
red, and brown worsted stockings, which the petticoat was short
enough to show plainly.  On the dressing-table before them lay two
tall white muslin caps, called _cornettes_, abundant in frills and
lace, but having no strings.  The hair of both girls was dressed high
over a frame, standing up some three inches above their heads; and
when the elder put on her cap, it increased her apparent height by at
least three inches more.

The chamber in which they were dressing was long and low, two large
beams being visible in the ceiling; and the casement, not two feet in
height, ran nearly across the width of the room.  There was a faint,
delicate scent of lavender.  The furniture comprised a large
four-post bedstead, an unwieldy wardrobe, a washstand, a
dressing-table, and two chairs.  The carpet was only round the bed
and washstand, the rest of the floor being left uncovered, and
shining with age and use.  The walls were wainscoted about half-way
to the ceiling, the higher portion being painted a dull light-green.
The girls turned to leave the room.

"O Lucy! your _cornette_!"

Lucy--aged eleven--made a dash at the dressing-table, and seizing her
cap by its frills, to the severe detriment of the lace, stuck it on
her head in the first way that occurred to her, and was about to rush
down-stairs without further ceremony.

"That will not do, Lucy," said the elder girl.  "You know what
Henrietta will say.  Go to the mirror and put your _cornette_ on
properly."

Muttering something which sounded like a statement that she did not
care what Henrietta said, Lucy retraced her steps to the glass,
pulled off the _cornette_, and stuck it on again, in a style very
little better than before.  This done, she joined her sister, who was
half-way down the stairs.  It was a fine old wooden staircase which
the girls descended, "worn by the feet that now were silent,"[1] and
at its base a long, narrow passage stretched right and left.  Our
young friends turned to the right, and after passing on for a few
feet, entered a door on the left hand, which led to the family
parlor.  This room had already three occupants, two young ladies and
a boy of fourteen.  The two former were dressed like Lucy and her
sister, except that the younger of them, who sat at a tapestry-frame
in the corner of the room, wore broad pieces of brown velvet round
her neck and wrists.  The boy, who was equipped in out-door costume,
part of which consisted of a pair of thick and pre-eminently splashed
boots, sat on a low chair, staring into the fire, whistling, and
playing with a riding-whip.

"Lucy! your hair!" was the shocked exclamation with which the
new-comers were received.

"Oh, my hair is all right!  I brushed it--this morning," said Lucy,
the last words in a much lower tone than the rest; and then she asked
of her whistling brother, "Have you heard anything, Charley?"

Charley shook his head without ceasing to whistle.

"Harry is not come yet?"

"No," said Charley, in a very discontented tone; "and he has taken
Bay Fairy, and I can't go out.  'Tis enough to provoke a saint."

"That ben't you, Master Charley!" said a new and cheery voice, as an
elderly woman appeared, carrying a little tea-tray, from behind the
heavy, japanned screen which stood near the door.  She was dressed in
a black woollen gown, low in the neck, with a white muslin kerchief
above, and a cap of more modest pretensions than those of the young
ladies.

"What does the impertinent old woman mean by calling me a sinner?"
inquired Charley, addressing himself to his boots.

"You ben't?" said old Cicely, setting down the tea-tray.  "Well!
stand up and let us look at you, do!  You are the first ever I see
that wasn't no sinner!"

To which cutting observation Charley replied only by banging the door
between himself and the unwelcome querist.

"Ay, it ben't for none of us to set ourselves up i' thatn's!"
meditatively remarked old Cicely, in her turn to the teapot.  "Mrs.
Henrietta, there's a poor old man at the yard-door, my dear, and I
can't tell where to look for Madam; maybe you'd see to him, poor
soul?"

Henrietta, the eldest sister, answered by quitting the room.  Cicely
arranged the tea-cups--large shallow cups of delicate china--on a
small round table in the window.

"The tea is ready, Mrs. Bell," she said; "will you please to pour it?"

The decorated young lady who sat at the tapestry-frame rose
languidly, and began to pour out the tea, while Cicely set four
chairs round the little table; having done which, the latter calmly
took one of them herself, and producing a large colored handkerchief
from her pocket, carefully spread it over her black woollen dress.

"Well, truly," said she, for she was in a talkative mood this
evening, "there is no end to the good in a dish of tea.  I am sorry I
ever said what I have done against it, my dears, and I wish Madam
would drink it.  'Tis so heartening like!  It is a new-fangled sort
of drink, there's no denying; but surely, I wonder how we ever got on
without it!"

"Cicely," said Henrietta, coming in, "I have told Dolly to give the
poor man some meat and dry straw in the shed for to-night."

"Very good, Mrs. Henrietta," answered Cicely; "I'll see as he gets
it.  Mrs. Bell, I'll be obliged to you of another dish of tea."

There were only four tea-drinkers in this family, and, until a few
months previous, there had been only three.  The gentlemen despised
what they considered a washy and exclusively feminine beverage, and
the mistress of the house could by no means be induced to taste it.
It was a new-fangled drink, she said, and new-fangled things, of
whatever description, she abhorred.  People never drank tea when she
was a child, and why should they want it now?  This was Madam
Passmore's logic, and under its influence she drank no tea.  Still
she did not forbid her daughters' indulging in it.  Young people, she
allowed, were given to new-fangled things; and could be expected to
be wiser only as they grew older.  She was a little annoyed when the
logic of the young people, adverse to her own, made a tea-convert of
Cicely Aggett, who was about twenty-five years her senior; but Madam
Passmore was a quiet, passive sort of woman, who never kept anger
long, and was in her heart a fatalist.  "What must be must be," she
used to say; and many a time had she consoled herself with this
comforting adage under troubles of various kinds.  She said so when
her son Harry went into the army; she said so when her husband broke
his leg in fox-hunting; and she said so, but with tears, when her
little daughter Margaret died.  She had no political opinions but
those of her husband, who was a fervent Whig; but deep down in her
heart she was a profound Tory in all domestic matters, for she
disliked change and novelty beyond everything.  She never put down a
new carpet until the old carpet was quite beyond endurance; not from
any parsimonious motive, but simply because she liked best those
things to which she was most accustomed.  She never would have slept
with comfort if her bed had been turned with its side to the wall
instead of its back; nor would she ever have conceded that a new lamp
burnt half so brightly as the old one.  Her surviving family
consisted of two sons and four daughters, who were remarkably alike
in person--all but one.  The neighbors who were sufficiently high in
position to visit with Squire Passmore of Ashcliffe, often wondered
how it was that Celia Passmore was so unlike every other member of
the family.  They were tall and stately in figure, she was small and
slight; they had abundant light hair, hers was thin and dark; their
eyes were blue or gray, hers brown.  Most of all was she unlike her
twin-sister, Isabella, who was considered the beauty of the family,
and was very well aware of it.  There was nothing remarkable about
any of the others; but Celia, some said, was sadly plain, poor girl!
and it must be a great mortification to Madam Passmore, who had been
a country belle in her young days.

Cicely Aggett, whom we have seen seated at the table with her young
mistresses, was one of a class wholly extinct in our days.  She was a
dependent, but not a servant.  She had, some fifty years before this,
been Madam Passmore's nurse, and she now filled a nondescript
position in the family of her nursling.  She was always ready to help
or advise, and considered nothing beneath her which could add to the
comfort of any member of the family; but she took all her meals in
the parlor, and was essentially one of themselves.  She was the
confidante of everybody, and all knew that she never abused a trust.
Madam Passmore would as soon have thought of turning the dog out of
the room before making a confidential communication, as of turning
out Cicely, simply because Cicely's dog-like fidelity was completely
above suspicion.

The tea was now finished.  Lucy, who had not yet arrived at the
dignity of a tea-drinker, was roaming about the room as Cicely
departed with the tea-tray.

"There is Harry!" she exclaimed, looking out of the window.  "He must
have some news--he is waving something above his head.  Henrietta,
may I run and meet him?"

Henrietta gave consent, and away went Lucy at the top of her speed
down the broad avenue which led from the house through the park.  The
young officer was trotting up on Bay Fairy, with his spaniel Pero
panting after him; but he reined in his horse as Lucy came up to him.

"A victory!" he cried.  "A victory at Malplaquet! a glorious victory!
Run, Lucy!--a race! who will tell Father first?"

Lucy--if it were possible; there was very little doubt of that.  She
ran back as fast as she had come, turning her head once to see how
Harry was getting on.  He was not urging his horse beyond a walk; it
was evident that he meant to give her a chance of winning.  She ran
towards the stable-yard, where she knew that the Squire was, and at
last, arriving triumphantly first at the yard-gate, burst suddenly
into the arms of her father, as he was just opening the gate to come
out.